The debut of ChatGPT was unforeseen, and even the most sophisticated technical report on Artificial Intelligence published in 2021 failed to anticipate such an advanced AI model [1]. It took the world by storm. Despite the imperfections in the GPT-3.5, a new model, GPT-4.0, emerged within just a year of its release. This model demonstrated tremendous capabilities, from general tasks to highly specific tasks, like generating images, code error identification and resolution, solving many complicated tasks and so on [2]. While the global response was generally positive, the AI report by Stanford raised questions about the overall ethics and integrity of the current AI systems which were evidently apparent. It also talked about the percolation of AI in the healthcare systems and other areas that directly affect the general population [1].

Within just a year and half of their initial release, these AI models significantly impacted the day-to-day life of society. Reading through the recent publications on the advancements of AI, it is safe to assume that AI will continue to evolve for the near future (around 2 years horizon) by solving the existing problems. As such, these are my predictions for the AI systems for the next two years. 

Bias reduction and trust: The biggest inherent problem in the current AI systems is that of bias, which might arise at any stage of creating a model. Bias is one of the most significant hurdles in using an AI system to its full capacity and the ethical questions raised against it. However, with a significant amount of research effort aimed towards reducing this bias, the new AI systems would be much more neutral in their judgement [3]. This would make them much more trustworthy, transparent, fair and reliable. By answering the existing issues with ethics and integrity, these systems are likely to be received with much enthusiasm by the governments and general population alike [4]. We can see a much wider range of applications with such an AI system.

Context-Aware AI: The AI systems of the future might have a long-term memory instead of the current short term one, as mentioned as a future work in [2]. With vector databases Pinecone and vector search like MongoDB Atlas Vector Search already in market [5] [6], the AI systems of the future are bound to be much more context-aware than the current systems. This will allow the new AI models to learn and retain the knowledge captured or experience [6] [7]. This is currently not possible even with GPT-4 [8]. Essentially, this means the AI systems can update and share their updated knowledgebase frequently, allowing them to be far more reliable. Given the proliferation of applications like ChatGPT in the general population, this effectively translates to better automation and informed decision making [9], which could be received by humanity with a significant positive outlook. The ability to update knowledge also means that the models do not need to be retrained and redeployed. These self-learning models can consume new knowledge on the fly [10].
In conclusion, I predict that over the next few years, the issues in the existing models will be addressed. This will pave the way for a new generation of AI models which are more trustworthy, fair and much more helpful to the general public and sophisticated use cases alike.
